---
layout: post
title: Media Playlists
---

We have a playlists for our favorite music, but don't re-consume great
information nearly enough. Almost certainly you've once watched a documentary
(or read a book) about [the environment](https://www.beforetheflood.com/), after
which you ponder how to reduce your footprint: an electric car, [eating less meat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environmental_impact_of_meat_productionhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environmental_impact_of_meat_production),
or [voluntarily paid carbon tax](http://theconversation.com/airline-emissions-and-the-case-for-a-carbon-tax-on-flight-tickets-56598)
on your air-travel emissions. Then, after a few weeks, the effects largely fade
and you gradually return back to baseline..

This cycle of a bee entering your bonnet for a short period of time, only for
another bee to take its place, is ineffective, to say the least. We pick up gems
from conversations, articles, books, and videos, only to use them for a few days
or weeks. Most things we learn, we forget, unless our environment strongly
nudges us to repeatedly consider those ideas. However, most ideas don't make the
leap from medium-term memory into long-term principles. How can we increase our
odds of compounding ideas on top of each other, instead of leap-frogging between
new ones?

[Spaced repetition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition) is the
simple idea that the probability of remembering an idea for the long-term
increases dramatically if we're reminded at an intentional, exponential
schedule. We might learn that the word for the effect where we learn a new word
and start noticing it everywhere is called the 'frequency illusion.' To not
forget this, we make sure we're exposed to this piece of information a few days
from now, then a week after that, two weeks after that, then a month, three
months, and then every 6 months from there. This is a well-studied effect and
many (including myself) have had [success with this through
flash-cards](http://sirupsen.com/airtable). We expose ourselves to the piece of
information *just* before we would forget it, refreshing the memory.

However, the effect doesn't need to be constrained to fun facts on flash cards.
It can be deep, complex ideas as well. Ideas or ways of thinking that we
incorporate deeper, and deeper into our wetware with each successive
re-consumption of an article, book, or video on some schedule. In the past year,
I've been interested in exposing myself to an increasing amount of spaced
repetition outside of flash cards. 

[Readwise](http://readwise.io/) helps me by re-surfacing highlights from my
Kindle and Instapaper.  Quite a few times reading through the daily digest from
Readwise, a highlight came at just the right time to implement it that day, or
sparked new connections to form deeper memories. My pet theory is that the truly
useful ideas that make it from books to our own life principles are the ones
that strike us at _just_ the right time where we needed that idea. Through
spaced repetition, we increase that probability dramatically.

In general, the more well-connected an idea in your head, the higher the
likelihood that it surfaces at the right time. To me, the definition of a useful
idea is one that's readily available when you need it. It is hard work, and
takes time, to mold the neural connections to elevate an idea to this status. A
100, time-tested ideas stored in this fashion are worth a thousand times more
than 10,000 that enter and leave rapidly.

For example, a few months ago, a highlight about [survivorship
bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Survivorship_bias) came up. This cognitive
bias points out that we don't adequately value the information *not* present. We
may be inclined to say that 'old buildings are more beautiful' when in fact,
when you think about it, only the beautiful old buildings survive. The ugly ones
are teared down and new ones will take their place. This idea came up in my
Readwise digest as I was walking to work, at just the right time. It was highly
applicable to a problem we were working through on the team. As a result, I now
see survivorship bias everywhere I look. It feels like that one, deep
application made an order of magnitude more neurons connect than anything I'd
done previously.

While flash cards and Readwise have been helpful, it doesn't solve the problem
for me of content that requires more deliberation. A video, article, or entire
book. For the first two, a few months ago I built a script that will
re-surface article or videos saved in Instapaper on a spaced repetition
schedule. For example, I liked [this article about Expectations vs
Forecasts](http://www.collaborativefund.com/blog/expectations-vs-forecasts/)
in my Instapaper and archived it. A week later, it came up on top of my
to-read list again. Then a month after that.  I'll see it again in another few
months, for it to finally only be read every 6 months. This creates a 'playlist' of
great articles, with new articles coming up once in a while too. Spending more
time on a few great articles is providing me more value than trying to read
everything. I now mostly skim articles on the first read. If it's interesting,
I'll 'like' it and go in more depth the second time. I'm finding myself taking
more notes and highlights each time it pops up again. I add videos to
Instapaper too, to recycle the same system.

While this is good, I hope that the next-generation of read-it-later services
will build spaced repetition straight into their core product. I hope they'll
help with heuristics on when to read old, and when to read new. Perhaps treat
the inbox not as a queue, where what I just added comes up on top, but what I
added months or years ago is next. This helps avoid the cycle of spending the
majority of your time [consuming media that expires
rapidly](http://www.collaborativefund.com/blog/expiring-vs-lt-knowledge/).
