---
layout: post
title: Positive Unknown-Unknowns
---

When we make decisions, it’s useful to think of the unknown-unknowns. Almost in every case, we think about this in a negative sense. If we’re venturing into unknown territory, we accept that it’s likely we’ll stumble upon [Black Swans](https://www.amazon.ca/Black-Swan-Improbable-Robustness-Fragility/dp/081297381X): improbable events that throw a wrench into our plans. Typically, we’ll draw on our experience to take the path we figure has the fewest unknown-unknowns. We may choose to stretch something we already know instead of adopting something new. Brooding on negative unknown-unknowns is extremely useful, and fairly commonplace.

I think it’s equally useful to invert the traditional thinking about unknown-unknowns and ask ourselves: How many *positive* unknown-unknowns might we face with this option? Might we face more positive black swans, than negative? When making decisions, we weigh most strongly the first-order effects. We can learn to [systematically think of the second- and third-order effects](https://www.fs.blog/2016/04/second-level-thinking/). However, as we get further away from first-order effects, the probabilities decrease for each event, and our ability to assess them does, too. That means the space of second-order unknown-unknowns, negative and positive, will be greater than the first-order unknown-unknowns. The number of unknown-unknowns will increase exponentially the more we distance ourselves from the initial decision. The number of fifth-order unknown-unknowns from a decision will be incomprehensibly large.

Initially, the Internet had a fairly niche purpose. However, it seemed to many that connecting the planet would be a good idea. There’s no way that those connecting the globe could’ve anticipated the amount of positive unknown-unknowns ramifications of the Internet. What they did project, however, was that the space of unknown-unknowns positives for the Internet was enormous. Similarly, if we look at cryptocurrencies today, people are smitten with the potential for the positive unknown-unknowns. What the Internet, cryptocurrencies, and the printing press have in common is that they’re foundational platforms with an enormous surface area for positive unknown-unknowns. 

I’ve seen this happen numerous times. Someone builds something great and simultaneously takes the time to solve the problem one layer deeper than they otherwise might have. They sense the potential in increasing the probability of positive unknown-unknowns, by supplying the vision of a platform. Internally, two years ago we had an [employees-only single podcast](http://sirupsen.com/podcast). Today, we have around ten ranging from training, interviews to learn more about how to build an internal product or history lessons about the company from our executives. When it was clear that there was an internal podcast *platform*, it exploded. The first podcast went one level deeper to provide a platform, increasing the surface area for positive unknown-unknowns.

We will have to remain humble to the fact, that often we can’t predict this. There’s an old Taoist story about second-order effects:

> “When an old farmer’s stallion wins a prize at a country show, his neighbour calls round to congratulate him, but the old farmer says, “Who knows what is good and what is bad?”
> 
> The next day some thieves come and steal his valuable animal. His neighbour comes to commiserate with him, but the old man replies, “Who knows what is good and what is bad?”
> 
> A few days later the spirited stallion escapes from the thieves and joins a herd of wild mares, leading them back to the farm. The neighbour calls to share the farmer’s joy, but the farmer says, “Who knows what is good and what is bad?”
> 
> The following day, while trying to break in one of the mares, the farmer’s son is thrown and fractures his leg. The neighbour calls to share the farmer’s sorrow, but the old man’s attitude remains the same as before.
> 
> The following week the army passes by, forcibly conscripting soldiers for the war, but they do not take the farmer’s son because he cannot walk. The neighbour thinks to himself, “Who knows what is good and what is bad?” and realises that the old farmer must be a Taoist sage. ”

You may look at two options that presently seem equally good. Have you considered which one has larger optionality long-term? Third-order effects that you could by no means predict? With the option that you’ve chosen, have you considered if you can expose a nugget of platform, to take it to greater heights than you ever anticipated? 

Considering positive unknown-unknowns has changed my mind quite a few times in the past year. Contemplating optionality is *not* about making decisions based on hope. It is one of many mental models in your arsenal to improve your decisions. Each model gives you a new vantage point to see the problem from to help you come to a better decision.


