---
layout: post
title: 2018
---

Every year, I spend some time reflecting on the year that past. After reading
last year's post, I noticed a fair bit of self-indulgent tangent chasing. Most
of which should likely have been separate posts. I'm attempting less of that
this year. I'm continuing to evolve the format, but it'll probably be a few
years until I settle on one.

## Berlin

Jenn took a medium-term assignment in Berlin, so a decent chunk of 2018 I spent
stretched between Berlin and Ottawa. After five years in Ottawa, I was starting
to feel a tad restless. Five years easily turn into 10, and while five years is
a long time, 10 is a really long time. Spending time in Berlin provided an
opportunity to test what life would be like in an objectively cooler city,
without committing to a major change. We enjoyed some fantastic weekends in
Berlin: knödel shops where the hairdo-memo said 'Grease' (unfortunately, we
missed it, so no mullet this time around), biking across the city with friends
visiting from Denmark to a bus-turned-café, and the weekly kinda-festival at
Mauerpark, where amphitheatres turn into makeshift crowd-karaoke. Despite all of
this, the best thing about the stint in Berlin was, as cliché as it may sound,
the re-appreciation of how good my life is in Ottawa. Berlin is a city that
screams 'temporary.' I don't recall meeting a single person 'from there' or a
single person who wanted to stay there permanently.  The city has a faint smell
of millennial quarter-life crisis, I know, because given another year, that'd
likely have been what drew me there! Close to family, but also close to the
global pulse. In contrast, Ottawa has the diametrically opposite effect on
people. After this, I'm pretty okay with that. 

## Reading

More so than the satisfaction of chasing a high number of books read, it was a
significant focus-point for 2018 to evolve the system __around__ reading. I
increasingly feel that the more time I allocate to processing what I've read
(primarily through writing, creating flashcards, and cataloging ideas), the more
long-term reward. I wrote a much longer post about [the
system](https://sirupsen.com/read/) I went through most of 2018 with. It'll
continue to evolve, and I expect to update the post within the next year or two
with the experiments I'm carrying out. The feedback loops on increasing reading
retention are wonderfully and painfully long. Last year, I ended up [reading
around 55 books](https://www.goodreads.com/user_challenges/10779425). Some that
stood out were The Wright Brothers; wonderful story of innovation and fortitude,
The North Water; the fiction that's kept me most glued since Harry Potter, The
Course of Love; raw and genuine account of long-term relationships, Doing Good
Better; a way to think about charity that appealed to me, and The Goal; part of
the underrated genre of  fiction with a refreshingly tangible takeaway.

## Health

The frequent flights between the New and Old World were dreadful. The whole
thing clinched for me that the romantic idea of a "Nomad Lifestyle" would be a
nightmare for me. If that phase of life hits me, it's clear that my shape will
be in 3-month chunks, not backpack-increments. Always coming out of jet lag, or
being about to go in it, was exhausting. That, and the poor seating that invited
poor posture. Under those conditions, it proved challenging to improve physical
health, despite the Gym in Berlin being the best I've frequented yet. It had
that dungeon-gym vibe I didn't know I'd craved that badly. The health hit of jet
lag and transit-nutrition was uplifted by the intimidation factor of the guy
next to you casually deadlifting 500lbs, with his dog taking a nap on the
platform. This year, 2019, I hope to make some strides to improve my physical
fitness. More specifically, I'd like a ball to chase (event, in this context)
and improve my cardio, not just strength.

Inspired by a co-workers pulse watch, I decided that'd be an excellent motivator
to incorporate more cardio. Having a heart-rate monitor with a number closely
tuned to how miserable I'm feeling turned out to be a winning bet for tying my
running shoes more often. An unexpected additional benefit was that friends
started popping up in the Apple Watch fitness app. I have no problems with
abusing my competitive gene without shame when it comes to my health. Beating
Jeff turns out to be a great motivator.

## Work

2018 became a year of building teams. In 2017, we were about 1.5 teams, but by
the end of 2018, there are 3. The realization that I needed to build these teams
led to an intense hiring cycle. Time well spent. With these teams, we're able to
do the things that we've dreamt about for many years now—rather than some time.
It was a year with two themes: moving everything to the Cloud, and, improving
reliability. For the former, the team built a tool that allows us to move a shop
from one database to another with virtually no impact to the merchant. With this
tool, we moved every single shop individually from our data-centers to the
cloud. It's mind-boggling to me that we've run every Shopify merchant through
this tool without mangling any. 

Long-term, the concern for any company is that development slows down. You
combat that with world-class tooling. One tool we started investing in as a
team, is that all the applications inside the company have a standard way of
communicating. We started seeing more and more applications built independently,
but the tooling for them to leverage each other wasn't improving (for the nerds
in the crowd: RPC). We've laid the brickwork in 2018, but this year I'm
confident we'll start to see the first massive benefits within the company from
this foundational investment. Third, we process about 1 billion jobs in the
background at Shopify per day. This infrastructure hasn't gotten a lot of love
over the past five years, so the third team is built around improving this
machinery. They not only did that but also started experimenting with
automatically scaling workloads based on how busy the platform is. What I'm most
proud of is the increasing autonomy of these teams. Their independence frees up
time in 2019 to focus on the next project and the next squad. If you're
interested in any of this, you should shoot me an email.
