---
date: "2020-01-25T00:00:00Z"
title: 2019
---

The annual summary, reflection, status.

## Projects

Throughout 2019, I started seeing increasing utility in first-principle thinking
in the projects I was involved in. A famous example of first-principle thinking
was Musk evaluating existing rocket options for SpaceX. He scoffed at the $110M
price-tag. He promptly considered what metals go in a rocket and multiplied the
approximate quantities with the spot prices on the London Metal Exchange. The
price he got was somewhere around $2M. Clearly, he said, there's an opportunity
here to bring the cost down (and he and his team did).

In the context of computers, when evaluating the feasibility of projects and
tasks I'd started thinking about it as "it needs to read these files, this many
bytes, send this much data over the network, .. Fundamentally that should be
achievable in `x` time at $`y`." When observing the real system, there's
typically a gap between the first-principle, bottom-up understanding, as there
was in the rocket example. That first-principle gap presents an exciting
opportunity, to either (a) fix the inefficiency in the gap (e.g. make the system
cheaper or more performant), or (b) fix my model of the system to account for
the gap (I was missing some important part, in Musk's example, maybe he forgot
to include cobalt for the aerospace grade alloys). I decided to [give a
talk][napkin-talk] on the topic as an excuse to dive in even further. To keep my
(and others) skills sharp, I started publishing [an occasional newsletter with a
first-principle problem][napkin-news].


## Health

For as long as I can remember I've had a few fairly specific fitness goals:
handstand push-ups, muscle-ups, one-arm pull-ups, respectable olympic lifts,
hand walks, and a few others. Unfortunately, I've made little progress in this
realm and mostly stuck with the exercises I felt comfortable with. Achieving
proficiency in these movements requires some gruelling preparatory work, such as
wall walks (extremely tiring), 100s of kicking up against a wall to a hand-stand
and slowly lowering yourself (15 minutes of this is enervating), and feeling
sketchy about cleaning above a certain weight. Something that takes a lot of
energy and time to figure out on your own.

Consulting with a good friend (who's in impeccable shape) on the issue, he
recommended I seek out [OPEX Ottawa](https://opexottawa.com/). OPEX is a
franchise with a strict training program (that my friend had gone through).
Instead of doing classic personal training at a set time on a set day, they send
you programs and have you execute the program independently (either at their
gym, or your own). You meet with the coach occasionally, and have contact with
them throughout the week through the app. That sounded perfect, because it meant
I could maintain my freedom of going whenever and wherever I liked. Through a
3-hour assessment, he found many strength imbalances, mobility bottlenecks, and
several other blind-spots. By and large, the best decision for health in 2019.

## Reading

My 2019 reading ended up focused on innovation, the history of innovation, and
computing history. My favorite from 2019 was [Energy: A Human
History][energy-review] which takes us through humanity's journey from mules to
a (hopefully) renewable future. It goes into depth with steam engines,
combustion engines, and so much more. A close second was [The Idea
Factory](https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/3043739089) on Bell Labs, an
iconic industrial lab that gave us the transistor, solar cell, modern operating
system, and so much more. I read the
[Three-Body](https://www.amazon.com/Three-Body-Problem-Boxed-Set-Remembrance/dp/1250254493/ref=sr_1_3?keywords=three+body&qid=1579956754&sr=8-3)
sci-fi fiction series, which I thoroughly enjoyed as well.

I listened to way fewer audiobooks this year. I find that my Danish became quite
stagnant, so I decided to listen to more Danish podcasts . This has
re-invigorated my Danish, surely. Especially critical, as my Canadian
citizenship ceremony is at the end of this month.

You can see my full list of 2019 reads
[here](https://www.goodreads.com/review/list/38623347?order=d&shelf=read&sort=date_read).

## Systems

I've observed myself switching note-taking app every year (Evernote -> Workflowy
-> Dynalist -> Bear -> Notion -> Dynalist), indulging with
[Airtable](/airtable), and become somewhat addicted to chasing the perfect
system. Sometimes you end up spending more time working on the system, than
actually executing it. Migrations between them are painful, and lossy. It hardly
compounds. These note-taking apps tend to have poor APIs, fall out of touch
eventually, and generally age poorly.

To solve this, I decided to move all my notes to plain-text markdown files and
use all the standard command-line tools I've always used like `fzf`; to search,
`vim`; to edit, `ripgrep`; to search, `ruby`; to script, `ctags`; to navigate
between them, and so on. It's too early to tell whether this was too extreme,
but so far I am enjoying it. Mobile-access is a problem, but I've chosen to
accept that. There are some apps compatible with this system. They are ok, but
not great. Eventually I'll update my article on [how I read](/read) for this.
I'll continue to use Things for todo, since in that context a good mobile app is
absolutely necessary.

This year I've started to read more computer science papers. This is fairly
dense reading, and difficult to do on a laptop. I bought an iPad for this
purpose, hearing good things, but found that it was just as distracting as the
laptop and returned it. I then bought a [reMarkable](https://remarkable.com/)
based on a glowing recommendation from a friend. This has fit the niche very
well for dense content, PDFs, very technical articles, etc. I still use my
Kindle for long-form content. While I thought I'd primarily use the reMarkable
as an annotation and reading device, I've found the note-taking and drawing to
completely replace my paper-habits. Plenty of things that can be improved about
the reMarkable, but it works well for me.

## Travel

Jenn and I went to Dominica in the Caribbean this year. In 2017, they had a
devastating hurricane, but the island is far along now in its recovery.  We
heard stories from the locals holding on to their loved ones, passports, while
clammed in mattresses that night for protection while their houses were being
torn apart around them. We witnessed both the resilience of nature and people.
We recommend it for the pristine nature, hikes, and the lovely locals.

{{< img "*dominica*" "Boiling Lake in Dominica" >}}

In the early fall, we went to Europe. This was a combined trip for a friend's
birthday, my conference talk in Dublin, and hiking. Slovenians have got to be
some of the hospitable, down-to-earth, friendly Europeans. We stayed mostly in
the mountains as we traversed the North-Western corner. As our last visit, we
stayed in the mountains near Hisa Franko, the most famous restaurant in the
country. After a good meal, we ended up in the wine and cheese cellars into the
wee hours... a fantastic evening, but we paid the price with a 2 hour drive to
Venice airport the following morning. On a solo hike earlier in the trip, my
phone gave out while hiking. This was unfortunate, as this was while I most
needed it traversing an off-trail 'shortcut.' The Apple logo just kept
persistently flashing, but no map. As I was on a massive decline and there was
no nearby trail, I was good ol' lost. Fortunately, when you're on a mountain,
you know at least what direction down is. I eventually found a creek that I
hiked through for an hour, which lead to a village.. when I returned
back to our farm-stay, I met the owner who asked about my day. She informed me
that it was a terrible idea to take that shortcut, that yes, it's on the trail
maps, but it's not maintained.  And by the way, a few people die in these
mountains every year (I am thrilled I didn't know this while I was out there).

{{< img "*slovenia*" "The mountains I got lost in" >}}

[napkin-talk]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IxkSlnrRFqc
[napkin-news]: https://sirupsen.com/napkin
[energy-review]: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/3008690448
